README.md, before:

## Introduction

**Caution**: Still working in progress. The CUDA version does not work for now.

This project implements the optimization techniques proposed in
[Improving RNN Transducer Modeling for End-to-End Speech Recognition](https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.12415)
to reduce the memory consumption for computing transducer loss.

### How does it differ from the RNN-T loss from torchaudio

Actually, the implementation is based on [torchaudio](https://github.com/pytorch/audio),
so the two are functionally equivalent, i.e., they produce the same output for the same input.

However, this project is more memory efficient and potentially faster (**TODO:** This needs
some benchmarks)

### How does it differ from [warp-transducer](https://github.com/HawkAaron/warp-transducer)

I don't have much experience with warp-transducer. But I know that warp-transducer
produces different gradients for CPU and CUDA when using the same input. See
<https://github.com/HawkAaron/warp-transducer/issues/93>

`optimized_transducer` uses less memory than that of warp-transducer.


## Installation

You can install it via `pip`:

```
pip install optimized_transducer
```

### Installation FAQ

### What operating systems are supported ?

It has been tested on Ubuntu 18.04. It should also work on macOS and other unixes systems.
It may work on Windows, though it is not tested.

### How to display installation log ?

Use

```
pip install --verbose optimized_transducer
```

### How to reduce installation time ?

Use

```
export OT_MAKE_ARGS="-j"
pip install --verbose optimized_transducer
```

It will pass `-j` to `make`.

### Which version of PyTorch is supported ?

It has been tested on PyTorch >= 1.5.0. It may work on PyTorch < 1.5.0


### How to install a CPU version of `optimized_transducer` ?

Use

```
export OT_CMAKE_ARGS="-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DOT_WITH_CUDA=OFF"
export OT_MAKE_ARGS="-j"
pip install --verbose optimized_transducer
```

It will pass `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DOT_WITH_CUDA=OFF` to `cmake`.

### What Python versions are supported ?

Python >= 3.6 is known to work. It may work for Python 2.7, though it is not tested.

### Where to get help if I have problems with the installation ?

Please file an issue at <https://github.com/csukuangfj/optimized_transducer/issues>
and describe your problem there.

## Usage

`optimized_transducer` expects that the output shape of the joint network is
**NOT** `(N, T, U, V)`, but is `(sum_all_TU, V)`, which is a concatenation
of 2-D tensors: `(T_1 * U_1, V)`, `(T_2 * U_2, V)`, ..., `(T_N, U_N, V)`.
**Note**: `(T_1 * U_1, V)` is just the reshape of a 3-D tensor `(T_1, U_1, V)`.


Suppose your original joint network looks somewhat like the following:

```python3
encoder_out = torch.rand(N, T, D) # from the encoder
decoder_out = torch.rand(N, U, D) # from the decoder, i.e., the prediction network

encoder_out = encoder_out.unsqueeze(2) # Now encoder out is (N, T, 1, D)
decoder_out = decoder_out.unsqueeze(1) # Now decoder out is (N, 1, U, D)

x = encoder_out + decoder_out # x is of shape (N, T, U, D)
activation = torch.tanh(x)

logits = linear(activation) # linear is an instance of `nn.Linear`.

loss = torchaudio.functional.rnnt_loss(
    logits=logits,
    targets=targets,
    logit_lengths=logit_lengths,
    target_lengths=target_lengths,
    blank=blank_id,
    reduction="mean",
)

```

You need to change it to the following:

```python3
encoder_out = torch.rand(N, T, D) # from the encoder
decoder_out = torch.rand(N, U, D) # from the decoder, i.e., the prediction network

encoder_out_list = [encoder_out[i, :logit_lengths[i], :] for i in range(N)]
decoder_out_list = [decoder_out[i, :target_lengths[i]+1, :] for i in range(N)]

x = [e.unsqueeze(1) + d.unsqueeze(0) for e, d in zip(encoder_out_list, decoder_out_list)]
x = [p.reshape(-1, D) for p in x]
x = torch.cat(x)

activation = torch.tanh(x)
logits = linear(activation) # linear is an instance of `nn.Linear`.

loss = optimized_transducer.transducer_loss(
    logits=logits,
    targets=targets,
    logit_lengths=logit_lengths,
    target_lengths=target_lengths,
    blank=blank_id,
    reduction="mean",
)
```

For more usages, please refer to

  - <https://github.com/csukuangfj/optimized_transducer/blob/master/optimized_transducer/python/optimized_transducer/transducer_loss.py>
  - <https://github.com/csukuangfj/optimized_transducer/blob/master/optimized_transducer/python/tests/test_cuda.py>
  - <https://github.com/csukuangfj/optimized_transducer/blob/master/optimized_transducer/python/tests/test_compute_transducer_loss.py>

Commit message:

Disable warp level parallel reduction  (#15)
* Disable warp level parallel reduction.

Somehow it does not work for large sum_all_TU when computing
alpha and beta with warp level parallel reduction.

I have switched to using the method from
https://github.com/HawkAaron/warp-transducer
for computing alpha and beta.

* Update README.

* Fix typos.

README.md, after:

## Introduction

This project implements the optimization techniques proposed in
[Improving RNN Transducer Modeling for End-to-End Speech Recognition](https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.12415)
to reduce the memory consumption for computing transducer loss.

### How does it differ from the RNN-T loss from torchaudio


It produces same output as [torchaudio](https://github.com/pytorch/audio)
for the same input, so `optimizated_transducer` should be equivalent to
[torchaudio.functional.rnnt_loss](https://github.com/pytorch/audio/blob/main/torchaudio/functional/functional.py#L1546).

This project is more memory efficient and potentially faster
(**TODO:** This needs some benchmarks)

### How does it differ from [warp-transducer](https://github.com/HawkAaron/warp-transducer)

It borrows the methods of computing alpha and beta from `warp-transducer`. Therefore,
`optimized_transducer` produces the same `alpha` and `beta` as `warp-transducer`
for the same input.


However, `warp-transducer` produces different gradients for CPU and CUDA
when using the same input. See <https://github.com/HawkAaron/warp-transducer/issues/93>

This project produces consistent gradient on CPU and CUDA for the same input, just like
what `torchaudio` is doing. (We borrow the gradient computation formula from `torchaudio`).

`optimized_transducer` uses less memory than that of `warp-transducer` and is potentially
faster. (**TODO:** This needs some benchmarks).

## Installation

You can install it via `pip`:

```
pip install optimized_transducer
```

### Installation FAQ

### What operating systems are supported ?

It has been tested on Ubuntu 18.04. It should also work on macOS and other unixes systems.
It may work on Windows, though it is not tested.

### How to display installation log ?

Use

```
pip install --verbose optimized_transducer
```

### How to reduce installation time ?

Use

```
export OT_MAKE_ARGS="-j"
pip install --verbose optimized_transducer
```

It will pass `-j` to `make`.

### Which version of PyTorch is supported ?

It has been tested on PyTorch >= 1.5.0. It may work on PyTorch < 1.5.0


### How to install a CPU version of `optimized_transducer` ?

Use

```
export OT_CMAKE_ARGS="-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DOT_WITH_CUDA=OFF"
export OT_MAKE_ARGS="-j"
pip install --verbose optimized_transducer
```

It will pass `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DOT_WITH_CUDA=OFF` to `cmake`.

### What Python versions are supported ?

Python >= 3.6 is known to work. It may work for Python 2.7, though it is not tested.

### Where to get help if I have problems with the installation ?

Please file an issue at <https://github.com/csukuangfj/optimized_transducer/issues>
and describe your problem there.

## Usage

`optimized_transducer` expects that the output shape of the joint network is
**NOT** `(N, T, U, V)`, but is `(sum_all_TU, V)`, which is a concatenation
of 2-D tensors: `(T_1 * U_1, V)`, `(T_2 * U_2, V)`, ..., `(T_N, U_N, V)`.
**Note**: `(T_1 * U_1, V)` is just the reshape of a 3-D tensor `(T_1, U_1, V)`.


Suppose your original joint network looks somewhat like the following:

```python3
encoder_out = torch.rand(N, T, D) # from the encoder
decoder_out = torch.rand(N, U, D) # from the decoder, i.e., the prediction network

encoder_out = encoder_out.unsqueeze(2) # Now encoder out is (N, T, 1, D)
decoder_out = decoder_out.unsqueeze(1) # Now decoder out is (N, 1, U, D)

x = encoder_out + decoder_out # x is of shape (N, T, U, D)
activation = torch.tanh(x)

logits = linear(activation) # linear is an instance of `nn.Linear`.

loss = torchaudio.functional.rnnt_loss(
    logits=logits,
    targets=targets,
    logit_lengths=logit_lengths,
    target_lengths=target_lengths,
    blank=blank_id,
    reduction="mean",
)

```

You need to change it to the following:

```python3
encoder_out = torch.rand(N, T, D) # from the encoder
decoder_out = torch.rand(N, U, D) # from the decoder, i.e., the prediction network

encoder_out_list = [encoder_out[i, :logit_lengths[i], :] for i in range(N)]
decoder_out_list = [decoder_out[i, :target_lengths[i]+1, :] for i in range(N)]

x = [e.unsqueeze(1) + d.unsqueeze(0) for e, d in zip(encoder_out_list, decoder_out_list)]
x = [p.reshape(-1, D) for p in x]
x = torch.cat(x)

activation = torch.tanh(x)
logits = linear(activation) # linear is an instance of `nn.Linear`.

loss = optimized_transducer.transducer_loss(
    logits=logits,
    targets=targets,
    logit_lengths=logit_lengths,
    target_lengths=target_lengths,
    blank=blank_id,
    reduction="mean",
)
```

For more usages, please refer to

  - <https://github.com/csukuangfj/optimized_transducer/blob/master/optimized_transducer/python/optimized_transducer/transducer_loss.py>
  - <https://github.com/csukuangfj/optimized_transducer/blob/master/optimized_transducer/python/tests/test_cuda.py>
  - <https://github.com/csukuangfj/optimized_transducer/blob/master/optimized_transducer/python/tests/test_compute_transducer_loss.py>
